---
title: "The system for classification of low-pressure systems (SyCLoPS): An all-in-one objective framework for large-scale data sets"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publications/2025-01-01-syclops
excerpt: 'We propose an all-in-one cyclone detector and classifier to track lifecycles of different types of low-pressure systems.'
date: 2025-01-01
venue: 'Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JD041287'
#citation: 'Han, Y. and P.A. Ullrich (2025) "The system for classification of low-pressure systems (SyCLoPS): An all-in-one objective framework for large-scale data sets. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 130(1), e2024JD041287.'
---
**Han, Y.**, & Ullrich, P. A. (2025). The system for classification of low-pressure systems (SyCLoPS): An all-in-one objective framework for large-scale data sets. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 130(1), e2024JD041287.

Abstract
========
We propose the first unified objective framework (SyCLoPS) for detecting and classifying all types of low-pressure systems (LPSs) in a given data set. We use the state-of-the-art automated feature tracking software TempestExtremes (TE) to detect and track LPS features globally in ERA5 and compute 16 parameters from commonly found atmospheric variables for classification. A Python classifier is implemented to classify all LPSs at once. The framework assigns 16 different labels (classes) to each LPS data point and designates four different types of high-impact LPS tracks, including tracks of tropical cyclone (TC), monsoonal system, subtropical storm and polar low. The classification process involves disentangling high-altitude and drier LPSs, differentiating tropical and non-tropical LPSs using novel criteria, and optimizing for the detection of the four types of high-impact LPS. A comparison of our labels with those in the International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS) revealed an overall accuracy of 95% in distinguishing between tropical systems, extratropical cyclones, and disturbances. SyCLoPS produces a better TC detection skill compared to the previous algorithms, highlighted by an approximately 6% reduction in the false alarm rate compared to the previous TE algorithm. The vertical cross section composite of the four types of high-impact LPS we detect each shows distinct structural characteristics. Finally, we demonstrate that SyCLoPS is valuable for investigating various aspects of LPSs in climate data, such as the evolution of a single LPS track, patterns of LPS frequencies, and precipitation or wind influence associated with a particular LPS class.

[DOI (Paper Link)](https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JD041287) | 
[Eos Hightlight](https://eos.org/editor-highlights/the-all-in-one-cyclone-identification-framework) | 
[UNDRR PreventionWeb](https://www.preventionweb.net/news/all-one-cyclone-identification-framework) | 
[AMS 2026 Talk](https://yepkids.github.io/talks/AMS-2026-talk) | 
[Related Software](https://yepkids.github.io/software/software-syclops)